Introduction to heal.
A trauma informed therapeutic care model.
Children who enter residential or supported accommodation services
often carry the weight of trauma,
disrupted attachments,
developmental vulnerabilities,
and emotional wounds that are not immediately visible.
Traditionally,
behaviour has often been managed through rules,
sanctions,
rewards and consequences
with a focus on stopping
or correcting
what is seen as
challenging behaviour.
For example,
a child who becomes angry or aggressive might lose privileges,
be given a sanction.
Or be removed from an activity
in the hope that this will prevent the behaviour from happening again.
Because
of that,
traditional behaviour management approaches that lean heavily on consequences,
compliance or control
can miss the real issue.
They may reduce behaviour in the short term,
but they rarely reach the underlying distress,
fear,
or unmet need that is driving it.
And they can sometimes reinforce the child's belief
that adults are there to manage them
rather than understand and help them.
The HAL framework has been developed to provide adults with a trauma-informed,
relational,
and therapeutic way
of understanding and supporting children
whose early experiences have shaped their emotional world.
HAL shifts the focus away from
what is this child doing
toward the more important question,
what does this child live through
and what do they need to heal?
By reframing behaviour as communication,
Heel empowers caregivers to become agents of emotional recovery
rather than enforcers of discipline.